readme.md, before:

<h1 style="margin:0;">
	<span style="display:inline-block; vertical-align:middle; height:1em;">
		<img src="dd_logo.png" alt="Dataverse Debugger logo" style="display:block; height:2em; width:auto;" />
	</span>
	<span style="display:inline-block; vertical-align:middle; margin-left:0.5rem;">Dataverse Debugger</span>
</h1>

Dataverse Debugger is a Windows desktop tool that lets you reproduce Microsoft Dataverse requests locally, attach Visual Studio, and validate changes before you ever redeploy to the tenant.

[![Build and Release](https://github.com/RamonvanHinthem/DataverseDebugger/actions/workflows/build-and-release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/RamonvanHinthem/DataverseDebugger/actions/workflows/build-and-release.yml)

![.NET](https://img.shields.io/badge/.NET-8.0-512BD4) ![.NET Framework](https://img.shields.io/badge/.NET%20Framework-4.8-512BD4) ![JavaScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/JavaScript-ES2020-F7DF1E) ![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Windows-0078D6)

## In a Nutshell

- **Capture real traffic** from a model-driven app rendered inside the debugger.
- **Replay the payload locally** so your plugin DLL runs inside the bundled runner process (with Fake or Real writes).
- **Attach Visual Studio** to the runner, set breakpoints, and inspect the full pipeline.
- **Switch execution targets** (Live vs. Debugger bridge) per request without changing code.
- **Compose ad-hoc calls** using the embedded Dataverse REST Builder and send them to either target.
- **Impersonate users and toggle form helpers** (God Mode, logical names, changed fields) to understand the exact context.

## Typical Flow

1. Launch `DataverseDebugger.App`, sign in, and register the plugin assemblies you want to debug.
2. Use the built-in browser to reproduce the scenario; every request is captured and listed in the Collection tree.
3. Pick a captured node, adjust configuration (entity, impersonation, headers, etc.), and choose **Send to Debugger** to execute it against your local runner.
4. Attach Visual Studio if you need step-through debugging; the runner automatically hot-reloads assemblies when you rebuild.
5. When the trace looks right, flip the target back to **Live** and replay the same payload against the Dataverse environment.

## When to Use It

- You need to debug synchronous plugins or Custom APIs without deploying to Dataverse.
- You want to inspect the full execution trace (timings, `ITracingService` output, request/response bodies).
- You are building FetchXML/CRUD calls and want to send them either to Dataverse or to your local debugger using the same UI.
- You must test impersonation scenarios or confirm how field-level changes impact the payload before saving.

## Execution Modes (Plugin Debugging)

The runner supports three execution modes for plugin debugging payloads:

- **Offline**: fully in-memory; no live Dataverse calls. `Execute` supports WhoAmI only.
- **Hybrid**: cached writes + live reads via a ServiceClient-backed `IOrganizationService`. Cached creates are only injected for ID-targeted queries.
- **Online**: live reads + writes via ServiceClient. Writes are gated by `DATAVERSE_DEBUGGER_ALLOW_LIVE_WRITES`.

Execution mode is driven by the `ExecutionMode` request field (`Offline`, `Hybrid`, `Online`). If absent, legacy `WriteMode` mapping applies.

## Known Limitations

- Plugin execution is single-step (no pipeline re-entry simulation).
- Offline supports WhoAmI only for `Execute`.
- Hybrid `Execute` is Whitelisted to WhoAmI only.
- Access tokens are supplied per request; token refresh is not handled by the runner.
- Host-side Web API proxy routing remains separate from the runner's plugin debugging pipeline.

## Requirements

- Windows 10/11 with the [WebView2 runtime](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webview2/) installed (run the Evergreen bootstrapper once if needed).
- [.NET 8 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0) and the [.NET Framework 4.8 Developer Pack](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-framework/net48).
- [Visual Studio 2022](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/) (optional but recommended for debugging).


## TODO
- Darkmode
- Webresource Debugging (fiddler style)
- Fake plugin registration
- Expanded offline debugging UX

## Related Docs

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) – how the processes communicate.


Licensed under MIT. See `THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.txt` for bundled components. Use only in development/test environments.

Commit message:

docs: update architecture and readme for WebResource AutoResponder support chore: bump version to 1.1.0 in Version.props

readme.md, after:

<h1 style="margin:0;">
	<span style="display:inline-block; vertical-align:middle; height:1em;">
		<img src="dd_logo.png" alt="Dataverse Debugger logo" style="display:block; height:2em; width:auto;" />
	</span>
	<span style="display:inline-block; vertical-align:middle; margin-left:0.5rem;">Dataverse Debugger</span>
</h1>

Dataverse Debugger is a Windows desktop tool that lets you reproduce Microsoft Dataverse requests locally, attach Visual Studio, and validate changes before you ever redeploy to the tenant.

[![Build and Release](https://github.com/RamonvanHinthem/DataverseDebugger/actions/workflows/build-and-release.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/RamonvanHinthem/DataverseDebugger/actions/workflows/build-and-release.yml)

![.NET](https://img.shields.io/badge/.NET-8.0-512BD4) ![.NET Framework](https://img.shields.io/badge/.NET%20Framework-4.8-512BD4) ![JavaScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/JavaScript-ES2020-F7DF1E) ![Platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Platform-Windows-0078D6)

## In a Nutshell

- **Capture real traffic** from a model-driven app rendered inside the debugger.
- **Replay the payload locally** so your plugin DLL runs inside the bundled runner process (with Fake or Real writes).
- **Attach Visual Studio** to the runner, set breakpoints, and inspect the full pipeline.
- **Switch execution targets** (Live vs. Debugger bridge) per request without changing code.
- **Compose ad-hoc calls** using the embedded Dataverse REST Builder and send them to either target.
- **Impersonate users and toggle form helpers** (God Mode, logical names, changed fields) to understand the exact context.
- **Override WebResources** (JS/CSS/HTML/RESX) with AutoResponder rules to test local changes without redeploying.

## Typical Flow

1. Launch `DataverseDebugger.App`, sign in, and register the plugin assemblies you want to debug.
2. Use the built-in browser to reproduce the scenario; every request is captured and listed in the Collection tree.
3. Pick a captured node, adjust configuration (entity, impersonation, headers, etc.), and choose **Send to Debugger** to execute it against your local runner.
4. Attach Visual Studio if you need step-through debugging; the runner automatically hot-reloads assemblies when you rebuild.
5. When the trace looks right, flip the target back to **Live** and replay the same payload against the Dataverse environment.

## When to Use It

- You need to debug synchronous plugins or Custom APIs without deploying to Dataverse.
- You want to inspect the full execution trace (timings, `ITracingService` output, request/response bodies).
- You are building FetchXML/CRUD calls and want to send them either to Dataverse or to your local debugger using the same UI.
- You want to debug WebResource changes locally by serving files or folders from disk.
- You must test impersonation scenarios or confirm how field-level changes impact the payload before saving.

## Execution Modes (Plugin Debugging)

The runner supports three execution modes for plugin debugging payloads:

- **Offline**: fully in-memory; no live Dataverse calls. `Execute` supports WhoAmI only.
- **Hybrid**: cached writes + live reads via a ServiceClient-backed `IOrganizationService`. Cached creates are only injected for ID-targeted queries.
- **Online**: live reads + writes via ServiceClient. Writes are gated by `DATAVERSE_DEBUGGER_ALLOW_LIVE_WRITES`.

Execution mode is driven by the `ExecutionMode` request field (`Offline`, `Hybrid`, `Online`). If absent, legacy `WriteMode` mapping applies.

## WebResource Debugging

AutoResponder rules let you serve WebResources from local disk or proxy to an external server. Rules support Exact, Wildcard, or Regex matches and run only when Capture and WebResources are enabled. This makes it possible to validate JavaScript, CSS, or HTML changes locally without redeploying them to Dataverse.

## Known Limitations

- Plugin execution is single-step (no pipeline re-entry simulation).
- Offline supports WhoAmI only for `Execute`.
- Hybrid `Execute` is Whitelisted to WhoAmI only.
- Access tokens are supplied per request; token refresh is not handled by the runner.
- Host-side Web API proxy routing remains separate from the runner's plugin debugging pipeline.

## Requirements

- Windows 10/11 with the [WebView2 runtime](https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/webview2/) installed (run the Evergreen bootstrapper once if needed).
- [.NET 8 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0) and the [.NET Framework 4.8 Developer Pack](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet-framework/net48).
- [Visual Studio 2022](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/) (optional but recommended for debugging).


## TODO
- Darkmode
- Fake plugin registration
- Expanded offline debugging UX

## Related Docs

- [ARCHITECTURE.md](ARCHITECTURE.md) - how the processes communicate.


Licensed under MIT. See `THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.txt` for bundled components. Use only in development/test environments.
